Welcome to Strollcast! I'm Eric.
And I'm Maya. We're your AI hosts, here to make research accessible while you're on the move.
Today we're covering a paper that won the NeurIPS 2025 Best Paper Award. That's a huge deal in the machine learning world.
Absolutely. NeurIPS is one of the top conferences, and this year they accepted about 5,300 papers. Only a handful get best paper recognition.
The paper is called "Gated Attention for Large Language Models: Non-linearity, Sparsity, and Attention-Sink-Free" by researchers at Alibaba's Qwen team.
It was also selected for an oral presentation, putting it in the top 1.5% of all accepted papers. So we're talking about work that really impressed the reviewers.
What I love about this paper is that the core idea is surprisingly simple. They add a single gate after the attention mechanism, and it fixes multiple problems at once.
That's the hallmark of great research. Finding an elegant solution that seems obvious in hindsight, but took careful investigation to discover.
Before we dive in, let's set the stage. This paper is fundamentally about improving the attention mechanism in transformers.
Right. And attention is the heart of every large language model today. GPT, Claude, Llama, Qwen, they all use some variant of the transformer architecture with attention.
So any improvement to attention has the potential to benefit the entire field. That's why this work matters so much.
The authors are a large team from Alibaba, including Zihan Qiu, Zekun Wang, Bo Zheng, and many others. It's clearly been a collaborative effort.
And as we'll discuss later, they've already shipped this into production with their Qwen3-Next models. This isn't just theoretical work sitting in a paper.
Let's start with a refresher on how attention works. Eric, want to walk us through the fundamentals?
Sure. The attention mechanism was introduced in the famous "Attention Is All You Need" paper back in 2017. It revolutionized natural language processing.
Before transformers, we used recurrent neural networks. LSTMs and GRUs. They processed sequences one token at a time, which was slow and had trouble with long-range dependencies.
Attention changed all that. The key idea is that every position in the sequence can directly look at every other position. No more going step by step.
So how does it actually work? You have three components: queries, keys, and values. These are all linear projections of the input.
Think of it like a database lookup. The query asks "what am I looking for?" The keys say "here's what each position contains." And the values hold the actual information to retrieve.
You compute attention weights by taking the dot product of queries and keys. This measures similarity. Similar query-key pairs get high weights.
Then you apply softmax to normalize these weights into a probability distribution. They all sum to one.
Finally, you multiply these weights by the values and sum up. The result is a weighted combination of all values in the sequence.
The beauty is that each position can dynamically decide what to attend to. It's not a fixed pattern. It's learned and input-dependent.
And modern transformers use multi-head attention. Instead of one attention operation, you run multiple in parallel.
Each head can learn to look for different things. Maybe one head focuses on syntax, another on semantics, another on positional relationships.
You typically have 32, 64, or even 128 attention heads in large models. Each with its own query, key, and value projections.
This has been incredibly successful. But after years of deployment at scale, researchers discovered some quirks in how attention behaves.
That's a diplomatic way to put it. There are genuine problems that emerge when you train on trillions of tokens.
Let's talk about the first major problem: attention sinks. Maya, can you explain what's happening here?
Sure. Researchers noticed something strange when analyzing trained models. A huge amount of attention goes to the very first token.
And not because the first token is actually important. It's often just a special token like "beginning of sequence" that carries no semantic meaning.
Exactly. In the baseline models the Qwen team studied, about 47% of all attention was going to the first token. Almost half!
Let that sink in. Nearly half the attention budget is essentially being thrown away on a token that doesn't matter.
The phenomenon was first documented in a paper called "Attention Sinks" and later explored in StreamingLLM. It's been observed across many model families.
The hypothesis is that this happens because softmax attention always has to sum to one. It's a probability distribution by construction.
So what happens when the model doesn't actually need to attend to anything? Maybe it's processing a simple token where the local context is sufficient.
The attention weights still have to go somewhere. They have to sum to one. The model needs a dumping ground.
And the first token becomes that dumping ground. A sink for excess attention probability mass. Hence the name "attention sink."
There's even a paper called StreamingLLM that proposes adding explicit "sink tokens" as a workaround. You reserve the first few positions for dummy tokens.
But that's treating the symptom rather than the cause. And it wastes context window space. Every token you use for sinking is one you can't use for actual content.
If you have a 32,000 token context and you need 4 sink tokens, that's not a huge deal. But at million-token contexts, inefficiency really adds up.
What if instead the model could just output zero when it doesn't need to attend to anything? No sink required.
There's a related issue called "massive activations." Let's explain what these are.
During training and inference, you occasionally see unusually large values appear in the hidden states. Activations that are orders of magnitude larger than typical.
These outliers cause problems in several ways. First, they can destabilize training. Sudden loss spikes that are hard to recover from.
If you're doing a million-dollar training run and your loss suddenly explodes, that's a disaster. You might lose days of progress.
Second, massive activations interact badly with quantization. If you're trying to compress your model to run on smaller hardware, outliers make it much harder.
Quantization works by representing weights and activations with fewer bits. Instead of 32-bit floats, you might use 8-bit or even 4-bit integers.
But if your values span a huge range because of outliers, you lose precision on the typical values. The outliers dominate the dynamic range.
This has been a major headache for deploying large models efficiently. People have developed all sorts of workarounds.
The Qwen team noticed that massive activations and attention sinks are connected. They stem from the same architectural limitation.
Standard attention is quite constrained in its expressivity. There's a lack of non-linearity in certain parts of the computation.
Let me explain. In standard attention, the value projection and output projection are both linear transformations.
The value projection takes your hidden states and produces value vectors. The output projection takes the attention output and projects it back to the hidden dimension.
Mathematically, these two linear transformations can be merged into one. The composition of linear functions is linear.
This means the model lacks certain computational capabilities between the attention and output stages. It's fundamentally limited.
To compensate, the model develops weird behaviors. Attention sinks and massive activations are symptoms of this architectural constraint.
So how does gated attention solve these problems? Let's look at the actual mechanism.
The modification is elegantly simple. After computing the scaled dot-product attention output, you apply an element-wise gate.
In equation form, it's Y prime equals Y element-wise multiplied by sigmoid of X times W theta.
Let's break that down piece by piece. Y is your normal attention output. That's what you'd get from standard SDPA.
X is the input hidden states. The same input that goes into computing queries, keys, and values.
W theta is a learnable weight matrix. It projects the input to the same dimension as the attention output.
And sigmoid is the activation function that squashes everything between zero and one. It's the classic S-shaped curve.
So you're computing a gate value for each element of the attention output. Then you multiply element-wise.
If the gate outputs zero, that element gets zeroed out. The information is blocked.
If the gate outputs one, the element passes through unchanged. Full transmission.
And you can have any value in between. A gate of 0.5 halves the signal strength.
The key insight is that this gate is input-dependent. It's computed from X, so it adapts based on what the model is processing.
Different inputs produce different gate values. The model learns when to let information through and when to block it.
And because sigmoid saturates near zero and one, you get sparse behavior in practice. Many gate values end up near the extremes.
Which means the model can now output zero when appropriate. It doesn't need to dump probability mass into a sink token.
The attention weights might still point somewhere, but the gate zeros out the output. Problem solved mechanistically.
Let's dig deeper into why this works. The first reason is that it adds non-linearity where there was none before.
We mentioned that the value and output projections are both linear. Mathematically, you could merge them.
This is actually a problem. It limits what the attention layer can compute. You're missing expressive power.
By inserting a sigmoid gate in between, you break that linear chain. Now you have a genuine non-linear transformation.
The sigmoid introduces multiplicative interactions. The output depends on the product of two computed quantities.
This is similar to what happens in gated linear units, or GLUs. They've been used in feedforward layers for years.
The SwiGLU activation that's popular in modern transformers is exactly this idea. You gate the feedforward computation.
Mathematically, you compute two parallel branches and multiply them together. This adds expressivity without much cost.
Gated attention extends this concept to the attention mechanism itself. If gating helps in feedforward layers, why not in attention?
Think of it like adding a hidden layer. You're giving the network more capacity to model complex patterns.
The model can now learn functions that were impossible before. The representation space is richer.
And the beautiful thing is, it's computationally cheap. One matrix multiplication and one sigmoid per layer.
The Qwen team measured less than 2% increase in wall-clock latency. That's negligible for the benefits.
You're getting significant capability improvements for almost no extra cost. That's the sweet spot in architecture design.
The second reason gated attention works is the sparsity it induces. This is really interesting.
The sigmoid function has a particular property. It saturates at the extremes. Very negative inputs give values near zero. Very positive inputs give values near one.
The transition region is relatively narrow. Around zero input, you get around 0.5 output. But move a few units either direction and you're at the extremes.
In practice, the learned gate weights tend to produce many near-zero values. The model learns to be selective.
This creates a sparse mask over the attention output. Only the informative parts pass through.
Think of it like a filter. The gate decides what's worth keeping and what should be discarded.
And this directly solves the attention sink problem. When the model doesn't need information from attention, it gates to zero.
The attention weights might still sum to one and point at the first token. But who cares? The output is zeroed anyway.
No more dumping probability mass into meaningless positions. The gate handles it gracefully.
The numbers from the paper are striking. First-token attention dropped from 47% to under 5% with gated attention.
That's nearly a 10x reduction. And those attention resources are now being used productively elsewhere.
The model is actually looking at relevant content instead of parking probability mass in a sink.
Let's talk about how the Qwen team validated these ideas. Their experimental setup is genuinely impressive.
They didn't just train one model and call it a day. They tested 30 different configurations. Thirty!
That's the kind of thoroughness that deserves recognition. They systematically explored the design space.
They compared 15 billion parameter Mixture of Experts models and 1.7 billion parameter dense models.
The MoE models are relevant because they're used in production. The dense models let you isolate effects more cleanly.
All trained on 3.5 trillion tokens. That's a serious investment in compute to run these experiments.
To put that in perspective, GPT-3 was trained on about 300 billion tokens. They're using 10 times that per model.
And they trained 30 models at this scale. The compute budget for this paper must have been substantial.
This is one of the things that makes the paper stand out. It's not a theoretical proposal with toy experiments.
They trained full-scale models on production-grade data. The results are directly applicable to real systems.
And they didn't just try one gating approach. They systematically explored multiple positions and variants.
Let's walk through the different gating positions they explored. They labeled them G1 through G5.
G1 is gating the SDPA output directly. That's the scaled dot-product attention output, before the output projection.
This is the position that eventually won. We'll see why in a moment.
G2 is gating the value vectors before they go into attention. You compute values, gate them, then do the attention computation.
G3 is gating the key vectors. Similar idea, different target.
G4 is gating after the final output projection. The very end of the attention block.
And G5 represents various other architectural positions they experimented with.
The winner was G1. Gating right after the attention computation, at the per-head level.
Per-head is important. Each of the 32 or 64 attention heads gets its own independent gate.
This gives fine-grained control. Maybe head 7 needs to be gated while head 12 should pass through.
It makes intuitive sense. Different heads learn different patterns. They should be controlled independently.
A head that learned syntactic patterns might need different gating than one focused on semantic similarity.
The results showed clear separation. G1 consistently outperformed the other positions across their metrics.
One of the most practically important findings is about training stability. Let's discuss that.
Training large language models is notoriously finicky. Ask anyone who's done it at scale.
You're optimizing a function with billions of parameters. Small perturbations can cascade into disasters.
Loss spikes are the most visible symptom. Training is going fine, loss is decreasing smoothly, then suddenly it jumps up.
Sometimes the model recovers. Sometimes it doesn't. You might have to restart from an earlier checkpoint.
That's expensive. If you're two weeks into a training run and have to roll back three days, you've lost significant compute.
The Qwen team found that gated attention dramatically reduces these spikes. Training becomes much more stable.
They showed training curves comparing gated and ungated models. The ungated ones have visible spikes. The gated ones are smooth.
And because of this stability, you can use larger learning rates. This is huge for practical training.
They increased from 4.0 times 10 to the negative 3 to 4.5 times 10 to the negative 3.
That's a 12% increase in learning rate. Which might not sound like much, but it compounds.
Higher learning rates mean faster convergence. You reach the same loss in fewer steps.
They also mean you can explore the loss landscape more aggressively. You're less likely to get stuck in local minima.
And they often lead to better final performance. There's a rich literature on the benefits of large learning rates.
It's a virtuous cycle. Better stability enables higher learning rates, which lead to faster training and better models.
Speaking of better models, let's talk about the scaling properties they observed.
Scaling laws are a big deal in modern ML. How does performance improve as you add compute or data or parameters?
The famous Chinchilla paper showed that performance scales predictably with these factors. It's not random.
If gated attention only helped at small scale but the benefit vanished at large scale, it wouldn't be interesting.
Fortunately, the opposite is true. The gap between gated and ungated models grows as you scale up.
At 1.7 billion parameters, there's an improvement. At 15 billion, the improvement is larger.
This is exactly what you want. The technique becomes more valuable as models get bigger.
And we're in an era of 100 billion parameter models. The trends suggest gated attention would help even more there.
The Qwen team validated this across their range of model sizes. The scaling curves are compelling.
For practitioners, this means gated attention is worth considering regardless of your current scale.
Another exciting result is improved long context extrapolation. Let's unpack what that means.
When you train a model, you use a fixed context length. Maybe 4,096 tokens, maybe 32,000.
But at inference time, users might want longer contexts. Maybe they're processing a long document or having an extended conversation.
The problem is that models often degrade when you push beyond their training length. They extrapolate poorly.
You might see repetition, incoherence, or just degraded quality. The model wasn't trained to handle those lengths.
Gated attention helps here. The Qwen team tested extrapolation from 32K training length to 128K inference.
They used a technique called YaRN, which adjusts the positional encoding to handle longer sequences.
With standard attention plus YaRN, you get some extrapolation ability. The model works at 128K but quality drops.
With gated attention plus YaRN, extrapolation is significantly better. Quality is maintained at longer lengths.
The hypothesis is that attention sinks create artifacts that hurt extrapolation. The model develops bad habits around position zero.
When you extend to longer sequences, those habits cause problems. The model expects certain patterns that don't generalize.
Gated attention prevents these artifacts from forming in the first place. The model is more robust to length changes.
This is practically important. In production, their Qwen3-Next model handles up to 1 million tokens.
That's enabled partly by gated attention improving extrapolation. It scales to extreme lengths gracefully.
Let's put gated attention in context with other proposed solutions to these problems.
We mentioned StreamingLLM, which adds explicit sink tokens. That works but wastes context window space.
Every token reserved for sinking is one you can't use for actual content. At million-token contexts, that adds up.
There are also various normalization schemes. QK-Norm normalizes the queries and keys to control magnitudes.
RMSNorm and LayerNorm applied in different positions can help with activation outliers.
These help with stability but don't fundamentally address the attention sink phenomenon.
There are alternative attention mechanisms entirely. Linear attention avoids softmax by using different kernels.
State space models like Mamba don't use attention at all. They're recurrent architectures with different tradeoffs.
These are interesting but require major architectural changes. They're not drop-in improvements.
The advantage of gated attention is minimalism. You keep the standard transformer. You just add one gate.
All the existing tooling, optimization techniques, and intuitions about transformers still apply.
It's complementary to other improvements too. You can combine gated attention with RoPE, with grouped query attention, with MoE.
There's no conflict. You're not choosing between gated attention and other techniques.
And importantly, gated attention addresses root causes. The sink problem exists because the model can't output zero.
Gated attention gives it that ability. Problem solved at the source rather than with workarounds.
Let's get into implementation details for folks who might want to try this.
The core change is simple. After your SDPA computation, add a gating operation.
You need a linear projection from input hidden states to gate values. Same dimension as attention output.
Apply sigmoid to get values between 0 and 1. Then element-wise multiply with your attention output.
The gate projection is per-head. If you have 32 heads with dimension 128 each, you have 32 separate gates.
The weight matrix W theta is learned during training. It's just another parameter to optimize.
Initialization matters. You don't want the gate to start by blocking everything. That would hurt early training.
The team used a bias initialization that gives sigmoid outputs around 0.8 to 0.9 initially.
So the gate starts mostly open. Information flows through almost unimpeded at the beginning.
As training progresses, the model learns when to close the gate. But it starts from an open position.
This is similar to how residual connections help. You default to passing information through.
The overhead is minimal. One matrix multiply per attention layer. The weight matrix is small relative to the rest.
They measured less than 2% latency increase. You barely notice it in practice.
Memory overhead is just the gate projection weights. A few million parameters on a billion-parameter model.
The code is open source on GitHub. You can look at the exact implementation details there.
This isn't just academic research. Gated attention is deployed in production systems.
The Qwen team integrated it into their Qwen3-Next architecture. This is their frontier model family.
Specifically, they released Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-Instruct. An 80 billion parameter MoE model.
The A3B means 3 billion active parameters. Only a subset of experts activate for each token.
This gives you the capacity of 80 billion parameters with the inference cost of 3 billion.
And they report context lengths up to 1 million tokens. One million! That's unprecedented for a production model.
The long context capability is partly enabled by gated attention. The extrapolation benefits scale up.
The models are available on Hugging Face. Anyone can download and try them.
Going from research paper to production this quickly shows confidence in the approach.
It's not just theoretical improvement. It survives contact with real-world deployment.
The Qwen team has strong incentives to ship only things that work. This passed their internal bar.
The paper includes detailed ablation studies. Let's highlight the key findings.
First, per-head gating outperforms per-layer gating. You want that fine-grained control.
With per-layer gating, all heads get the same gate value. That's too coarse.
Different heads learn different patterns. They need independent control over information flow.
Second, sigmoid works better than other activations. They tried tanh, ReLU, and others.
Sigmoid has the right saturation properties. It naturally produces sparse near-zero and near-one values.
Tanh is similar but centered at zero. ReLU doesn't saturate at one. Sigmoid is the sweet spot.
Third, gating position matters enormously. G1, right after SDPA, clearly dominates.
Gating the values before attention, G2, also helps but less than G1.
Gating after the output projection, G4, barely helps at all. The position is crucial.
Fourth, the gate must be input-dependent. Static learned gates don't work as well.
This makes sense. The whole point is dynamic filtering based on current context.
A static gate would be like fixed attention patterns. You'd lose adaptability.
These ablations are valuable. They tell you what matters and what you can vary.
The paper provides theoretical grounding beyond just empirical results.
They analyze the rank of learned representations. Gating increases effective rank.
Rank measures how many independent dimensions the representation uses. Higher is more expressive.
Without gating, the value-to-output path can collapse rank. The composition of linear maps can reduce dimensionality.
The gate breaks this and preserves or increases rank. The model uses its capacity better.
They also formalize the non-linearity argument. Standard attention has a linear path from values to output.
You have the value projection, then attention weighted sum, then output projection. All linear operations.
The softmax is non-linear, but it operates on a different part of the computation. The value path is linear.
The gate inserts a genuine non-linearity into this value path. It enables multiplicative interactions.
This is related to polynomial expressivity. Products let you represent more complex functions than sums.
The theoretical analysis complements the empirical results. You understand both what happens and why.
How has the research community received this work?
The NeurIPS Best Paper Award is one strong signal. That's peer recognition at the highest level.
The oral presentation selection is another. Only 1.5% of accepted papers get that honor.
On social media and forums, reception has been positive. People appreciate the simplicity and thoroughness.
Several other labs have reportedly started experimenting with gated attention in their own models.
It's too early to see widespread adoption, but the signs are encouraging.
The fact that it's already in production Qwen models lowers the barrier for others to try it.
You can see that it works at scale, not just in a research paper. That's compelling evidence.
Let's zoom out and discuss what this means for AI more broadly.
First, it shows there's still room to improve the transformer architecture. Even after years of research.
The original transformer came out in 2017. We're in 2025. Eight years of intense work.
And we're still finding fundamental improvements. That's both humbling and exciting.
Humbling because we clearly don't fully understand these systems. The design space is vast.
Exciting because there's more to discover. We're not at the end of architectural innovation.
Second, it demonstrates the value of systematic empirical investigation.
The Qwen team tested 30 variants. Not one or two with some intuition. Thirty.
That thoroughness is what found the optimal configuration. G1 with per-head sigmoid gating.
Without systematic search, they might have tried G4 and concluded gating doesn't help much.
Third, it highlights the importance of scale. Some effects only emerge with trillions of tokens.
The attention sink phenomenon wasn't documented until models got really big.
You need scale to see the problems that scale creates. It's a bit circular but real.
Finally, simple solutions often beat complex ones. One gate beats elaborate workarounds.
There's elegance in finding the minimal change that solves multiple problems.
This work opens up new questions. What might future research explore?
One direction is understanding why G1 is optimal. Is there a deeper principle at play?
Why is gating after SDPA better than gating values or keys? The paper shows it is but doesn't fully explain why.
Another direction is different gate functions. Sigmoid works, but maybe something else works better.
Learnable piecewise linear functions? Softmax gates? There's a design space to explore.
How does gated attention interact with other innovations? Sparse attention patterns, for instance.
Or mixture of experts at the attention level. What if different experts had different gating behaviors?
There's also the question of even larger scale. They validated up to 15 billion parameters.
But frontier models are 10 to 100 times that size. Will the benefits hold at 500 billion? A trillion?
The scaling curves suggest yes, but it hasn't been directly tested yet.
And what about other modalities? The paper focuses on language. What about vision or audio?
Transformers are used everywhere now. Gated attention might benefit those domains too.
Let's wrap up with practical takeaways for our listeners.
If you're training large language models, gated attention is worth considering seriously.
The implementation is straightforward. Add one gate after SDPA. Initialize thoughtfully.
The code is open source on GitHub. You can integrate it into your pipeline.
For practitioners using pretrained models, look for Qwen3-Next and future architectures adopting this.
The benefits are compelling. Better stability, better scaling, longer context. It's a package deal.
If you're just interested in understanding AI, this paper is a great case study.
It shows rigorous research methodology. Identify problems. Propose solutions. Test exhaustively. Validate at scale.
The scientific method applied to deep learning. Elegant and effective.
And the result is something you can actually use. Not just theory, but production-ready improvement.
Alright, let's summarize what we've covered today.
We discussed the Qwen team's NeurIPS 2025 Best Paper on gated attention for large language models.
The core insight is adding a sigmoid gate after scaled dot-product attention.
This simple change solves multiple problems at once. That's what makes it elegant.
It introduces non-linearity where there was none. The value-to-output path was linear before.
Now there's a multiplicative interaction. The model can compute more complex functions.
It induces sparsity. The model can output zero when it doesn't need attention information.
This eliminates attention sinks. No more wasting 47% of attention on the first token.
It prevents massive activations. Training becomes more stable. Loss spikes disappear.
You can use higher learning rates. Training is faster and reaches better optima.
Scaling improves. The gap between gated and ungated grows as models get larger.
Long context extrapolation improves. The technique enables million-token contexts.
And all of this costs less than 2% extra computation. Incredible return on investment.
The work exemplifies great research. Simple idea, thorough validation, real-world deployment.
It's already in Qwen3-Next models that you can use today.
If you want to dive deeper, the paper is on arXiv at 2505.06708.
The code is on GitHub under qiuzh20. The models are on Hugging Face.
Thanks for joining us on this deep dive into one of the year's most important AI papers.
We hope it gave you a clear understanding of why gated attention matters.
And how a simple architectural change can have profound effects.
Until next time, keep strolling.
And may your gradients never explode.